Continuous Integration with Jenkins 
What is a CI Pipeline?  
A Continuous Integration (CI) Pipeline automates the process of building, testing, and 
integrating code changes every time code is committed to the repository. This pipeline:  
• Automatically checks out the latest code.  
• Compiles the application.  
• Runs tests to catch errors early.  
• Notifies the team of build/test results.  
Why Use Jenkins for CI?  
• Automation: Jenkins automates the build and test cycle, reducing manual 
intervention.  
• Immediate Feedback: Developers get rapid notifications of any integration issues.  
• Extensibility: With hundreds of plugins available, Jenkins can integrate with version 
control systems, build tools (Maven, Gradle), testing frameworks, and more.  
• Pipeline as Code: Using Jenkins Pipelines (defined in a Jenkinsfile), you can manage 
the CI process as part of your source code repository.  
Prerequisites 
Before proceeding, ensure the following: 
Jenkins is installed and running on your system. 
Git is installed and configured in Jenkins. (Verify with git --version ). 
Maven is installed and configured in Jenkins. (Check with mvn -version ). 
Selenium Maven Project is ready with test cases ( src/test/java ). 
Project is stored in two places: 
Locally on your system (e.g., D:\Idea Projects\MVNGRDLDEMO ). 
Pushed to GitHub with a valid repository link. 
Jenkins has access to the GitHub repository (via credentials). 
Before doing experiment 6, we need to open command prompt and type  
java -jar jenkins.war 
1. Running a Selenium Java Test from a Local Maven Project 
Step 1: Create a New Jenkins Job 
1. Go to Jenkins Dashboard → Click New Item. 
2. Enter a project name → Select Freestyle Project. 
3. Click OK. 
Step 2: Configure the Build Step
1. Scroll to Build → Click Add build step → Execute Windows Batch Command. 
2. Enter the following commands (ensure correct navigation to project directory): 
cd D:\Idea Projects\MVNGRDLDEMO 
mvn test 
3. Click Save → Click Build Now to execute the test. 
2. Running Selenium Tests from a GitHub Repository via Jenkins 
Step 1: Set Up a New Jenkins Job for GitHub Project 
1. Go to Jenkins Dashboard → Click New Item. 
2. Enter a project name → Select Freestyle Project. 
3. Click OK. 
Step 2: Configure Git Repository in Jenkins 
1. Under Source Code Management, select Git. 
2. Enter your GitHub repository URL (e.g., https://github.com/your-repo-name.git ). 
3. Select the Git credentials configured earlier. 
Step 3: Add Build Step for Maven 
1. Scroll to Build → Click Add build step → Execute Windows Batch Command. 
2. Enter the Maven test command: 
mvn test 
3. Click Save. 
Step 4: Trigger the Build 
1. Click Build Now to fetch the code from GitHub and execute the Selenium tests. 
2. Check the Console Output to verify test execution.