What Is Ansible?  
Ansible is an open-source IT automation and configuration management tool. It allows you to manage 
multiple servers and perform tasks such as:  
• Configuration Management: Automate the configuration of servers.  
• Application Deployment: Deploy applications consistently.  
• Orchestration: Coordinate complex IT workflows and processes.  
Key Concepts in Ansible  
• Inventory: An inventory is a file (usually in INI or YAML format) that lists the hosts (or groups 
of hosts) you want to manage. It tells Ansible which machines to target.  
• Playbook: A playbook is a YAML file that defines a set of tasks to be executed on your target 
hosts. It is the heart of Ansible automation. In a playbook, you specify: Hosts: The target machines 
(or groups) on which the tasks should run.  
• Tasks: A list of actions (using modules) that should be executed.  
• Modules: Reusable, standalone scripts that perform specific actions (e.g., installing packages, 
copying files, configuring services). Ansible comes with a large collection of built-in modules 
(such as apt, yum, copy, service, etc.). These modules perform specific tasks on target hosts. You 
can also write custom modules if needed.  
Why Use Ansible?  
• Agentless: Ansible uses SSH to communicate with target hosts, so no agent needs to be installed 
on them.  
• Simplicity: Playbooks use simple YAML syntax, making them easy to write and understand.  
• Idempotence: Ansible tasks are idempotent, meaning running the same playbook multiple times 
yields the same result, ensuring consistency.  
• Scalability: Ansible can manage a small number of servers to large infrastructures with hundreds 
or thousands of nodes.  
Installing Ansible on Ubuntu (Using Windows Subsystem for Ubuntu (WSL)) 
What’s WSL?  
WSL allows you to run a full Linux terminal inside Windows without a VM. It’s lightweight and works 
perfectly for Ansible labs. 
Step 1: Install WSL (Windows Subsystem for Ubuntu)  
Open PowerShell as Administrator, and run this: 
wsl –install
This will:  
• Install Ubuntu as the default Linux distro. 
• Automatically enable WSL and reboot your system. 
wsl 
Step 2: Open Ubuntu (WSL)  
After installation and reboot:  
Search for "Ubuntu" in the Start menu and open it and type the below codes: 
sudo apt update 
Now it will asks for password enter the password. 
sudo apt install ansible -y 
That will install Ansible successfully. Now to verify installed ansible or not, type below code: 
ansible --version 
Step 3: Create a Working Directory 
mkdir ~/ansible-lab  
cd ~/ansible-lab 
Step 4: Create an Inventory File  
Create a file named hosts: 
nano hosts 
type the below code: 
[local] 
localhost ansible_connection=local 
Then save:  
• Press CTRL + O → Enter to save  
• Press CTRL + X to exit  
Step 5: Test Ansible is Working  
Run a simple ping module: 
ansible -i hosts local -m ping 
You will see below code: 
localhost | SUCCESS => { 
"ansible_facts": { 
"discovered_interpreter_python": "/usr/bin/python3" 
}, 
"changed": false, 
"ping": "pong" 
} 
Step 6: Create a Sample Playbook  
Create a file named install_nginx.yml: 
nano install_nginx.yml 
Paste this basic playbook: 
--- - name: Install and start NGINX on localhost 
hosts: local 
become: yes 
tasks: - name: Install NGINX 
apt: 
name: nginx 
state: present 
update_cache: yes - name: Ensure NGINX is running 
service: 
name: nginx 
state: started 
enabled: yes 
Step 7: Run the Playbook  
ansible-playbook -i hosts install_nginx.yml --ask-become-pass 
Step 8: Verify the Result 
curl http://localhost
